Good morning.
We are ready when you are ready.
And, um, just let me know when everybody's online.
Morning. Uh, my people are here.
Good morning, agri search team. Thank you so much.
Uh, we have 60 minutes, one hour with you.
So if you would like to start by introducing your team,
and then you have around three to five minutes
for introductory remarks,
and then we will have questions from members.
Thank you.
Morning. Um, I'm Sue Bid Rose.
I'm the Chief Executive of AG Research, uh,
and with me today, I have my chief scientist here from
Palmerston, north Axel.
Good morning. I have, uh, my, um, head
of strategy in comms Marie Bradley,
beaming in from Wellington
Morina A
and coming in from Christchurch, I have my head
of finance, Carol Beit
Morina, And company Secretary and head of IT
and infrastructure, Greg Rosser.
Good morning. So each of them will, um,
answer questions in their own areas,
but, um, I do have an apology from Kim Wallace
because of the change of date.
My chair has been unable to make it this morning.
Uh, and so I'm going to give her introductory remarks.
That's totally fine. Thank you,
Ua. Thank you for the opportunity
to speak to you today.
Uh, this is a significant moment in AG researcher's history.
Today marks our final appearance
before this committee as AG research.
In fact, today marks our final day as AG research ahead
of the imminent merger
with our fellow Crown Research Institutes this afternoon,
this evening, uh,
to form the new public research organization
before speaking about what lies ahead, I want
to take a moment to acknowledge the end of an era
and to reflect on the critical investment in science.
That success of governments represented
by you here in this building have made
over the last 30 years.
The 45 million that we receive annually
through the strategic science investment funds of funding
is a cornerstone of AG researcher's success.
While it represents around a quarter
of our total annual revenue, it is a significant sum
and one we believe has been money well spent.
On behalf of the AG Research Board, our scientists,
technicians, and staff across New Zealand, I want
to thank you for this enduring support.
New Zealanders can be proud of
what their investment has made possible.
CIF has enabled us to deliver research
that drives real world economic,
environmental, and social returns.
It under underpins our support for the pastoral sector,
which continue to play a crucial role in powering New
Zealand's post COVID economic recovery.
The impact of our science stretches far
beyond the laboratory, shaping the strength
of our primary industries, reinforcing our global reputation
as a trusted food producer,
and preparing us for the challenge of a changing climate
and measuring return on that.
Investment in science isn't always as straightforward
as the commercial world can be,
but the benefits of breakthrough may take years to unfold.
The value may merge across the supply chain
or in the avoidance of costs, such as environmental damage,
lost productivity, or reputational harm.
But the evidence is clear when crown funded science is well
targeted and delivered in partnership with industry and iwi.
It is transformative for New Zealand's economy
are environment and our communities.
Thanks to our science,
new Zealand's become the first country in the world
to successfully develop low methane emitting
sheep genetic lines.
And along with innovative methods for rapid screening,
we've developed portable methane accumulation chambers
for sheep and just at the moment for cattle
that can be driven through the farm gate
and used on farm to accurately measure emissions
and select animals for breeding.
This is a world first achievement that is delivering actual,
tangible on the ground results In reductions in methane, uh,
we've got, um, New Zealand
with a leader in biological control of agricultural pe.
So for example, we introduced a small parasitic wasp
as a biological control agent against CLO root weevil.
We used to make the total benefits of that program
to be at least well, almost 500 million with benefits
to accrue at a rate of about 150 million a year
ongoing in a world.
First we discovered epi glowy fungal end fights,
which are now a vital component
for perennial ryegrass in New Zealand.
Uh, and the increase in efficiencies in milk
and meat production have led
to $3.6 billion estimated return in New Zealand economy.
This is a pretty startling piece
of work having invested $12 million in the science 20,
30 years ago,
and we are incredibly proud of it done with our partners,
PGG Rights and Seeds, grasslands technology.
Look, I have numerous other examples here, um,
but in the, um, in the, uh, um,
because of the time constraints.
So I'll, I'll come back to those
when the time is appropriate.
But I really want to finish by saying is this phase
of our journey comes to an end?
Can I reiterate our appreciation for the Crown's investment
to and research through it's built capability, partnerships
and science that makes a difference to productivity,
to resilience, to environmental outcomes,
and to New Zealand's reputation
as a leader in sustainable agriculture?
Thank you for trusting us with that responsibility
and for your stewardship of public investment in science.
By sharpening our focus on commercialization,
including greater support through grasslands technology
and genomes nz global funding opportunities,
we are ensuring our science delivers maximum impact
and new revenue streams increasing our commercial
as a proportion of our total revenue.
And at the same time, we've recently made tough
but necessary decisions about reducing costs
and to step back from underfunded research areas,
our newly defined research priorities,
targeting the major challenges in agriculture, agritech
and AgriFood, where our science can actually make a
difference, positions us strongly for the future.
And together these moves put us in a sound strategic
positions to successfully, uh, enter into today's merger.
And we are looking forward to that next chapter.
Our scientists are genuinely excited
about the changes ahead.
We are pleased with the progress we've been making
as ag research, the size
and scale that this new research capability
and capacity will involve
and continuing our impact on our community.
Thank you so much, Phil, for that introduction.
Uh, and now we have questions from members.
Uh, first we go to Ruben Davidson.
Just have to make sure I unmute first.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, yeah, look, I probably just want to start
with acknowledging the, um, the fact
that this is the last day of ag research and,
and as you've said, um, so the, the, you know,
the merger happens tomorrow.
So just wanted to acknowledge all of the work you've done,
much of which you've outlined in your opening statement,
and also the people who've been part of that
because, um, it's, it's very important.
Work has a, has a huge positive impact.
Um, given that this time tomorrow you will have merged.
I, I just wanted to know at a, at a high level how
that change process has been managed,
what your major considerations have been,
and if there are any remaining areas of concern
or if that's too stronger word, really the areas
that you'll be watching and,
and giving a priority to monitoring as the,
as the merger rolls out.
So the merger has, um, kind of stands out
as being at this point in time, I think very successful, uh,
uh, across the, and,
and I can only answer for the Bio Economy Science Institute,
which is the one that ag research will be part of.
I'm sure you've already talked to my colleagues about
Earth Sciences, but, um, in our area, I mean,
across the four, uh, ris
and particularly, I'm obviously most familiar with my own,
there is quite a lot of positive
excitement about the merger.
Um, and in particular about the ability
to more seamlessly
and less bureaucratically interface with colleagues in, um,
in aligned agencies.
So the idea of, of forming, uh,
I mean the Crown Research Institutes have always done a lot
together and a lot of, um, I've got a list of sort
of achievements here, and many, many
of them are in partnership with other riss
and, and universities.
Um, but, you know, if we want to partner up with plant
and food or mea, for example, to deliver some science,
aligning the health and safety commitments, uh, getting a,
getting the finance people to, um,
to draw up legal agreements, sign the legal agreements,
line up the different finance system,
work out our different charging mechanisms.
I mean, it really, it takes a lot of time
that we are all very much looking forward to not having
to waste and
to actually have our people spend their time doing science
instead of that stuff, which is necessary when,
when you're interfacing with other agencies.
So, um, I I would say attitudes are very positive.
Fact, in fact, very, very positive.
Um, we are doing regular pulse surveys to find out
what staff are worried about,
and we are addressing those things.
And some of it's been around the speed of the change
and access to information about how it's gonna unfold.
And some of that, of course, we don't know the answer to,
um, staff have been kept very well informed
by senior people at mb.
And I think, um, what really marks out this transition
as being, for being so positive is that it's being done
with the RIS rather than to the ris.
So there's been an acknowledgement
of the information we have about our own agencies
and our own people, what they want to achieve,
what they're worried about, how we might fix that.
So it's been, we've been, uh, not in the driver's seat
because MB own us, um,
but certainly, um,
we've certainly been backseat direction givers about,
listen, if you do that rather
than that, this will go better.
There's been a, um,
our own people have led all the working groups for how
to set up the new agency.
And in my view, that has been instrumental in,
in showing in terms of the positivity across our agencies,
um, for this, for this change that's about to happen.
The other thing is it got sped up, um,
when it became obvious that this merger was doable
because our base foundations are so similar, um,
when it got sped up, that means quite a lot
of the changes will happen once we are in the new
organization driven by the people
who are doing it on a day-to-day basis every day and,
and continuing in partnership with, with our officials,
with our colleagues at mb.
And that's going to be really good too.
And I think we're all feeling pretty
good about that as well.
Great. Uh, new question from Scott Willis.
Thank you, Sue. Um,
and now it's great, great to hear that it's going relatively
smoothly and, um, we can see that there's a whole lot
that ag research is doing that is so, so important.
Um, I'm, I'm really interested in how, uh,
because we've, we've heard that there's some, some issue
with some tough decisions that have had to be made, um,
as you'd understand, as we'd understand, you know,
and that you've got all
of those strategic measures, et cetera.
Um, we've, one of the issues
that's popped up in the primary sector has been the rise in
drench resistance in, in sheep.
And, and I'm wondering how you are sitting with the, um, uh,
para, uh, parasitologist team team, whether, whether
that is going to be something that is prioritized or,
or, um,
or are you minimizing that team going forward?
Because we know that we, we face some big, big issues
with our, um, primary sector, particularly with the rise
of parasite resistance from, from drench.
I know it's a rather detailed question, but, well,
It's a good question.
Um, and because there was a bit of mythology around there
that we disestablished our ology team, which,
which absolutely wasn't true, and it got in the paper two
or three times, and we ended up having to write
and ask them to correct it.
Um, we did have the retirement of a couple
of old older members and long serving members of that team.
Uh, and it has been an area of science
that we have really struggled
to get commercial partners to invest in.
And, you know, that does raise a question
of commercial partners.
If our de if our, if our farming partners don't want
to invest in that science, then
how come it is only the tax payer that's funding it?
And if it really is critical
and farmers think it's critical,
why aren't our farming agencies stepping forward
to be their share of the cost?
And so we went out and had that conversation
and said, this can't be a priority to to,
to solely be funded out of taxpayers funding,
and if you don't step up, then we will stop doing it.
Um, and actually the partners were great
and they sat around the table sort of said fair dues,
the stuff they really are interested in.
And so apart from, we've lost a couple of people, as I say,
older, older, longer serving members of the team, um, that
that work continues and it is now fully funded.
Great. Thank you. Thank you.
And members, I'm looking for more. Yep.
Ruben Davidson, another question from you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, so given that the, the, um,
in your review that we've had been for the 2024, sorry,
23, 24 year,
and we've seen some improvements across dairy, primary se,
uh, you know, the the dairy primary sector,
but we also can see globally,
there's huge uncertainty over the weekend.
We've just been reminded of, um,
how quickly the dynamics can change for our primary sector
with significant weather events.
How, how are you able to, um,
or how has ag research been able to,
in its previous form as a CRI
and how will it continue to, in its new form as part
of the PRO help through those fluctuations,
both domestically and internationally?
Sorry, just can you help me with the question?
Do you mean financially
or do you mean doing science around climate change events?
Um, kind of all of the above, potentially.
So, so certainly, um, assisting
with, with yield,
but also being able to assist with some of the significant,
um, restorative that's required after major weather events.
Just generally how ag research is able to assist with the,
the, the, um, fluctuations that we see across the sector.
I, maybe Axel
or Marie might be best placed to talk about the kind
of science that we've been doing since the last, um,
our major flooding events
and some of the work that we picked up to assist.
Thank you. Yeah, I, I can comment on that.
Um, we have, we have our, um,
you find our research priorities, which is the areas
of science where we, where we put the, the our if money
and, uh, we have just, um, redefined these
and the new focus is very much on, on areas
where we can achieve big impact.
And it's, it's resilience for the industry is one
of the big, big areas.
Um, and that's what we can do, uh,
from a science perspective
and from the research we do is to provide farmers
with guidance and with knowledge, um, to farm in a way
that makes their farm and, and their catchment
and the community more resilient.
And, and that is, that is focused on, on research
that helps on farm,
but it's also focused on research that goes beyond the farm
and looks at land use changes and how we can make catchments
and landscapes more resilient to, to weather events and,
and leading to diversification on farm and,
and communities so that they become more resilient to,
to global economic events.
And if I, that's what we hope
to continue in under the PRO,
And if I can chip in there, I think it's one
of the exciting things around coming together with,
with our ballow RIS in terms of
meki f in particular,
and plant food also with Cyclone Gabriel actually,
were on the ground helping, um, communities through that.
So this means that we as the Bioeconomy Science Institute,
will be able to do that more in a joined up fashion.
So I think that'll be great.
Uh, Ruben, you have a supplementary? Yeah.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, the, it seems quite busy.
So as far as research priorities go,
you've got the five new research priorities in the report,
five themes, eight research priorities identified
across the document.
And I guess in the, in the, in the, you know,
imminent merger, there's the potential
that there will be other riss research priorities
that come into the new model as well.
So how are you gonna monitor the success of those?
And, um, do you see that any of those priorities are gonna
shift or change given the merger?
Um, and if that's the case, are they gonna shift
or change tomorrow, or is that gonna be something
that happens over the next six to 12 months?
You, I, I'll, I'll start off as director of strategy
and comms and also having been involved
with the Bioeconomy Science Institute kind of transition,
um, that setting strategy for the new Bioeconomy Science
Institute's gonna be a really pivotal part of
how we collectively come together
and really imagine what the future might be
and be looking for something more out
of the new institute so it, it won't happen tomorrow.
Um, but having said that,
our science capability leaders have been working together,
um, really looking at the various capabilities we have
and how they might come together.
And also actually what we're seeing is there are a lot
of synergies across our various priorities currently.
Uh, and so we anticipate that there'll be a number
of sweet spots where we can really start working together.
But look, I think look
for this over the coming year would be my prediction.
Mm-hmm. Uh, new primary from, uh, Dr.
Van Winnick.
Uh, thank you Madam Chair,
and thank you so much to AG research, um,
just acknowledging the work that you've done over the years.
Uh, look, reading through your report, there was one thing
that, um, as a gardener really stood out to me,
and that was the map and zap
and, um, I just thought that was an example of something
that could be commercialized on many different levels.
And I wonder, is that the kind of thing
that we could potentially see from help
me in my garden at all?
Just half joking, half joking.
I probably won't leap in to talk about your garden,
having not seen it.
Uh, I must say, doing my own garden, though,
I have thought about it a few times.
Um, look, there's a lot of work underway at the moment about
commercialization of, of that, um, uh, potentially, um,
what the technology is at the moment.
It's a ground based thing,
but, you know, there's thoughts about whether it could
be a drone based thing.
Um, and, uh,
and we obviously, we've developed it with a,
with an Ida Pastoral agriculture, um,
but I think you might've seen in one of the answers, it's,
it's being trialed at the moment
and in, uh, vineyards up and down.
I mean, that isn't, that is one of our little exciting, um,
things that I've gotta say.
And when you, when you see this little robot in
operation, it's very cold.
Great. All right. We go to Scott Willis again.
Thanks, Scott.
Thanks. So, and I, look, I'm, I'm really impressed
to see your emissions reduction program
and, um, looking to work on, on fossil fuels energy,
et cetera, um, travel.
That seems like a, a really
positive focus for the organization.
So, you know, firstly, congratulations on, on,
on taking such active, an active response
to reduce emissions internally.
Um, coming back to the, the,
the very commercial focus that is, um, now part of,
well, has been part of CRS and,
and looks to be part of the growth agenda.
How do you think that that that emissions reduction, um,
approach is something that fits with
that more growth agenda?
Or, or how do you, how do you, how do you match match the
need to maintain low emissions with
the greater productivity, um, higher intensity,
um, development that is part of the growth agenda?
How are you, how are you gonna, how,
how are you gonna marry these things?
So, oh, do you want me to go or you,
I'll kick off and then I'll hand to you, Marie.
I mean, the one thing I would say is that, that,
that science is your tool to enable that.
So, um, without, um, without a scientific approach
to finding out what does actually work to increase
productivity and at the same time reduce emissions,
you haven't got a hope, I don't think so, you know,
maximizing returns, um, uh,
and picking up on the opportunities
to reduce the negative consequences of agriculture, um,
that's, that is actually what a huge proportion
of our science is about now.
So yes, it's absolutely a challenge
and it's much more of a challenge if you're not,
if you're not using a good
sound evidence base for your work.
I'll hand over, perhaps to Marie to talk about some of the,
um, or, and x or maybe about some of the examples
Well, well, from the sustainability,
and thank you very much for acknowledging our own
sustainability journey.
You know, we are proud of that,
and I wanna give a shout out actually to plant and food.
So this is something that we partnered with them on
and really benefited from some
of their leadership in this particular area.
And so for the Bioeconomy Science Institute, I see we need
to retain a focus on our own sustainability
and being able to walk the talk.
So a lot of our customers and clients
and including international markets, are really asking
for evidence of organizations to be doing that.
So the Future Fit Business Benchmark is something
that we've signed up to as providing us with some external,
um, accreditation across everything,
not just our emissions reduction.
So that's been really important,
and I think su already touched on it, actually, our science,
even with a focus on growing the economy,
still needs to demonstrate to those external,
our external markets
that our primary industries are meeting their
sustainability goals.
But Axel, do you wanna talk more on this?
No, maybe the comment I can add is that, that it, you,
you can see emissions as a waste product and,
and like other waste products that if we can help to reduce
production of waste products, including emissions,
then we can save money for the industry.
And, and that's where the science can, can come in
and help, um, to avoid these losses.
Uh, you have a supplementary Scott.
Yes. Uh, I, I think you've,
you've part partially answered it,
but it, it sounds as though the, the, the bigger
question or the bigger response is,
is not simply commercialization, but, but investing in
or understanding that that foundational stuff is, is more
of a public good.
That of course has economic benefit,
but in the long run, is that, is that how you'd, you'd,
you'd, you'd see it at, at our emissions reduction
and our responsibility to, to reduce risk is a,
is a, is a benefit for New Zealand Inc.
Is that, is that the way you are, you are working?
Yeah, that's definitely true.
Um, but that said, I think in working on farm, the benefit
for farmers is very real as well.
So the actual, um, you know, um,
large international companies, uh,
what's being said on the international stage about
who they will and won't import from where we sell our goods.
I mean, it's really important that, uh, again, you know,
when you talk about it as a public good, it kind of suggests
that it should all come out of SIF funding.
But actually our industry partners like Dairy
and z, um, meat Industry Association, beef
and Lamb, are actually stepping up and,
and funding this work.
Um, including, uh, also, um, our major, you know, um,
silver Fe Farms, our major Fonterra funding this work
to a good degree because they absolutely see
that their economic future depends upon it,
and the, the livelihood of their farmers
and the profitability of their farms also depends on,
you know, there's a lot of talk about potentially being able
to attract a premium if you are
doing really well in this space.
So, yes, it's a public good, absolutely no doubt, but,
but it's absolutely a private good as well.
Alright. A new primary from AR Davidson.
Um, sorry, struggling with my mute button.
Um, yeah, it's actually a sub off, um, uh,
Vanessa's question earlier about the Maps app.
Um, but don't worry, I'm not trying
to deploy it in my garden.
Um, it's, it's really looking at the AI capability
that exists already within, or,
or has existed within ag research.
And, um, so yeah, just a, a general comment on, on that.
Um, but also looking at, um,
more broadly, um, yeah, a few questions around ai.
So I probably start with the first one just being
what has the a what's, what's the understanding of
and appetite for, uh, the use
of artificial intelligence in the work
that AG research has done to date?
And then some subs off that, if, if with Madam Chair's
permission, I'll hand over to our chief scientist.
I thought you were going to our IT director. Okay.
Um, um, so ai,
AI has, has many aspects, as you know.
And, and we, we currently have, have about 60 projects
that apply AI in, in some form or another.
Um, we will probably not be an organization that does,
does deep, uh, development of new AI methods and,
and, um, and principles.
But we are already applying AI in,
in a wide range of, of cases.
Um, we have projects around image analysis with ai.
We have, um, project where we use AI to, um,
analyze large amounts of data.
Um, we have used AI for writing and summarizing.
So we're using all the different aspects of, of ai and,
and we are very aware of the, the potential it has to,
to speed up research,
make research more affordable at times.
Um, but we are also quite aware of the risks
that come with ai, um, um, where we trusted, um,
how, how privacy and,
and ip, um, considerations apply to it if,
if we use external systems.
Um, so in, in summary, I would say we, we see AI
as a big opportunity to speed up research
and do research in areas where, where we just work
with amounts of data that cannot be, um,
analyzed by, by a single human mind.
Yep. Uh, supplementary, uh, Ruben. Thanks, Madam Chair.
Um, so I'm, I'm presuming there's a fairly robust
AI policy in place within,
or has been in place within our research.
I'll, I'll take this one. Uh, yes, there is.
Uh, so we've had, uh, some guidelines in place, uh,
for 18 months now.
And those guidelines are referenced against the digital.gov
nz, um, guidance that comes out
that particularly applied to the generative AI area,
which there is just, as we've seen in recent times,
really exploded.
Uh, so, um, they'll continue to evolve.
I I monitor, uh, the, as the technology's changing, uh,
and have monitor that
and check that it's still applicable for our researchers
and that they understand the risks.
And as that, as that transition happens, where does
that monitoring role sit through the transition period?
'cause this could be one of the blind spots, right.
So, uh, science New Zealand, uh, which is the,
there's a governing group of that, the chief executives, uh,
of the seven CROs, um, sit on, uh,
the Science New Zealand has done some benchmarking
of our respective guidance documents across the seven CROs.
Uh, and we will align, uh, it's one of the early pieces
of work as the Bio Economy Science Institute comes together,
uh, to align to a single policy for us
Mm-hmm. More
Documentary, Ruben.
Yeah. Just a a final question on that
because, um, we've, we've spoken earlier
and, um, Sue, you mentioned it in opening remarks around
the, um, positive working relationships
that CS have enjoyed with one another prior
to now merging into pros where you are effectively part
of the same organization with ai.
My understanding is that we'll sit in,
sit in a separate PRO, um,
but do you still see the same scope to
partner PRO to PRO where there might be deep understanding
and assurance for the use of AI and,
and you could implement that
or partner that into research and projects?
So my understanding is the development
of new AI development methodologies tool sits in the new
PRO, but, but for example, MAP
and Z isn't going to transfer to the other PRO.
That kind of science
that uses AI will still be happening within the bioeconomy
PRO, um, you know,
in various partnerships across the various corners of it.
And at, you know, on day one, it'll be the four, the four,
um, groups within bio economy science will be ag research,
scion, monarch, and plant and food.
And then, um, and then that will change
as the new science structure
for the new organization beds in.
And, and I would imagine new AI using partnerships will be
formed across those groups.
Um, but that, that very much will happen within the
existing pros as well.
Yeah. So do you think, do you think, I mean, this is,
I don't know whether this is a question you can answer
or not, but do you think there's a risk that, um,
it could become, even in the new model,
there could still be silos that existed where
very useful expertise, resource
knowledge might be not, not accessed
by another PRO simply
because there isn't, isn't the oversight across who's doing
what, particularly within area like ai?
Can I, can I chip in there?
Um, so what I've been really impressed with is
how closely the chairs
of the CRI boards have been working really closely together
during this merger process.
And what I see is that that relationship
amongst the chairs, the new chairs of the new organizations,
and also that relationship with MB is likely to continue.
And so currently I'm aware that the
boards are talking about having a pan PRO, if you like,
charter to, to really make sure that things like
that don't fall between the gaps.
So I think that willingness is really there,
and if we can build on this kind of high trust relationship
that's formed during this merger, then that'd be awesome.
That's great. And as just a supplementary to clarify
that point, um, so, um, y your focus is mainly the use of AI
and, um, there is no restriction on you using AI
to do the work that you do.
That's right. Yeah. Just to clarify. Yeah.
Um, so that's kind of separating it from, um,
actually development work versus the use.
Um, Scott Will is a new primary question.
Thank you. Um, so you might've heard
that there's been some concern that there might be a,
a waiting towards locating the, the
pros in the north island.
And given we have such a, well, I'm a proud South Islander,
I want to see, I want to see some of the science base
back in the south island and retained in the south island,
and we have that strong campus at Lincoln,
we've got Inva May, can you,
can you give me your thoughts about
where things are are heading, and I then I'd follow up,
Um, joyously, it won't be my decision,
but I understand the decision about
where head office will be is, is imminent.
Um, there's been a lot of discussions.
Um, you write, uh, Lincoln is our largest campus, um,
with the beautiful new building, uh, on site there,
which is a location co-located with, uh, with,
with Lincoln University, which, um,
I think they do talk about their bio economy
credentials as well.
Um, so, so what I do know is that the, the
work being done to suggest that that, um, head office
or a proportion
of the agency should be in the South Island was certainly
heard by the people who are involved
in making that decision.
So it's certainly got, it's certainly got a good hearing.
Um, one of the things we found through future footprint,
which was one of our earlier attempts before my time to try
and change where research was located, was
that scientists aren't widgets.
And so they're not, it's not like a canning machine
and you can pick it up and move it to another center
and it will work just as efficiently
and, um, attempts to, um, to make changes, you know, have
to be done with your, with your workforce
because they're people
and they have children in the local schools,
and they have partners who work in the local businesses
as well, and so on and so forth.
So I think we did learn a lot through some
of those change processes.
Mm-hmm. Thank you. Do you have a sub, uh, Scott Willis?
Yes, I do. If I may.
Um, so this might be out of scope, I'm not sure,
but at the weekend I, I heard from
somebody at the Dunedin City Council about their work with,
now I think it's the TRE Zero Carbon Farming Collective
in a crutchley involved.
And, and so there's a, there's a lot
of excitement here from, um, beef
and lamb producers to be able to supply university and,
and supply locally,
essentially develop a geographical indication in the,
in the Tyre electorate.
I wondered if there's, if there's, if there's,
if AG researchers involved in any way
or if inva a, um, the,
the team at Inva a are are part of this,
because this to me looks as though something that,
that is really an exciting part of the,
the promise of the bio economy.
We can't answer you about that specific, about
that specific piece of work.
Unfortunately, there are just too many pieces of work.
I'd be surprised if we're not.
But, um, I'm more than happy to come back to you with
that, Scott.
That's good. Thank you. Are we good to Paula Garcia?
New primary?
Um, thank you, uh, chair. Uh, good morning.
Uh, Sue Marie and Greg
and team just wanted to say that ag is mind blowing
and you do amazing things.
Um, when the Prime Minister brought, um, a bunch
of CEOs over to the Philippines, Thailand,
and Singapore last year, AG was part of that, uh, group.
Uh, and what was mind blowing was the value
that ag research, um, could provide, um,
countries all over the world, um, with the ability to trace
origins from, um, plant varieties, uh, that,
uh, that are now scattered all over the world.
And, um, my question has to do with, uh, the fact
that ag agriculture is now coming into greater
for with all of the increased, uh, exports.
Um, are you also, uh, benefiting
from exporting the technology of traceability
and, um, the science behind, uh, plant, uh,
varieties everywhere?
Yeah, that can go to, or anyone who can,
Can I, can I just check, was that egg research person
or plant and food, um, who, who deal with a,
perhaps a wider variety of plant variety rights?
Obviously egg research has a strong, um,
focus on pasture related plants.
Um, so it might be,
but in terms of contributing into global challenges,
yes, we, we, we do participate.
Um, and some of that may be around the technology.
So our audible accumulation chambers don't pack
chambers to measure methane, for instance,
which we've been using to reduce emissions
here in New Zealand.
And the low methane sheep are now being used
by our research collaborators overseas, for instance.
Um, in a similar way we support with the green
reduction in greenhouse gas gases is the inventory
that we have here in New Zealand.
And then the Ag Emissions Center, as it is now called,
is sharing the knowledge kind of associated with that
to the developing countries, for instance. Mm-hmm.
Good. Thank you so much.
Yeah, I have a supplementary to that.
Um, and talking about the export revenue, uh, in the report,
it's, uh, very, uh, kind of, we cannot split
what revenue is coming from overseas.
Uh, can you tell us how it has been, uh, looking at the year
that we are reviewing, um, how
that revenue from other countries is looking,
uh, compared to the previous year?
Sue? Sorry, you're muted. Yeah,
I'm just asking Carol. Oh
Yeah. Okay.
Um, look, it's a really good question.
I don't have that data with me now,
but we can give that to you post the session.
That would be wonderful. Thank you so much.
And so we go to a new primary from Reuben Davidson.
Yeah, sorry, this is me with a residual sub to start with.
Anyway, I'm happy to go to a new primary after that.
Yep, yep. It was really just to, um,
with some follow up questions off, um, Scott's questions
around to hierarchy the, um, Lincoln based, um,
ag research head office.
And, um, so you mentioned that, um,
that decision wasn't yours, um, but that it was imminent.
I'm just wondering if you can give us some, uh, uh,
some more detail around, um, the timeframe on, on
that decision. I,
I'm sorry, I can't, what I know is that discussions
that have been had,
because I've seen, um, what I've been asked a couple
of times about my thoughts of various options and stuff.
So what I'm aware is, um, we, we are wanting
to know quite soon, uh,
and that, so that discussions are underway.
I'm sorry, that's, uh, what I do know, there's a,
the first board meeting, um, for the new
primary research institute is
next week, late next week, um, if that's any help.
But yes, all I know is discussions,
discussions are being held.
Um, just a quick little thing to add.
Uh, um, um, about 40 s staff
who were based in Christchurch are actually coming
to join us in to, so they'll be, um, there'll,
there'll be colleagues as opposed
to people in another research institute.
So they're, they're arriving shortly
due to changes for them.
So, so in some ways, um,
they're already Christchurch based, obviously.
In some ways those shifts are already starting to happen
as we start to look at ourselves differently.
All right. Um, we go to, uh, Scott Willis.
Uh, yeah, thank you.
Um, looking at, you know, uh, the science system,
AG research is one of the more complex areas.
It doesn't really hap, it happens in laboratory,
but it also happens on the farm
and the farm's a social space.
It's, um, it's, it's not just, you know, what do we, what,
what do we do, but who do we discuss things with?
Who makes the decisions?
And, and we've got families
who live on the farm within that system.
So I'm, I'm, I'm wondering about how do you, how do you
manage all of that, that, that, um, complexity?
Um, what are the, what are the elements that are,
that you are focusing on?
And I can see your priority areas, which is really,
really good, but you're clearly looking at, at human systems
and, and I'm, I guess what I'm asking is how does that ex
how, what, what are you doing for extension for moving out
into, into the, the farms
and how, how important is that for AC research
and will be going forward?
Perhaps you, Marie. Um, so yeah,
you've hit the nail on the head there, Scott, in terms
of the complexity and, and,
and really thinking about the different pathways
to achieving impact out of our research is really critical.
And so some of the
flagship research programs we've designed have a strong
element of social science in there.
For years, research has been working on
developing more transdisciplinary ways of working.
So that's not just
around bringing together different science disciplines
that transdisciplinary is
around bringing in different perspectives from the
communities that you might be operating in
and being able to co-design that.
Um, just recently we've recognized that
we were doing a lot of our, if you like,
extension activities through industry bodies,
and perhaps through that time had not maintained
as stronger linkages into our farming communities.
And so we've specially put in place a farmer
engagement type role.
Uh, who's Robin Dines? I don't know.
Many of you may have come across her,
but she's a really awesome wahine
that's well linked into catchments groups,
farmers organizations.
And so she's helping provide that outreach,
but also bring the intel back in.
What is it that we are seeing in those communities,
making sure that our research is designed appropriately.
And I think it's gonna be pivotal in this time.
'cause we heard recently that, you know,
don't quote me on the figures,
but sort of over half of our farmers,
they're gonna get a gold card in the next decade.
So how do we engage with the new, new coming
through mm-hmm.
Things I say, oops, sorry.
Oh, no, Sue, you carry on. Please
Say about the merger is, um,
UA have a very strong social science grouping, um,
much bigger and stronger than ours.
And one of the exciting things for me personally about,
about the merger is that there's a slightly artificial sort
of boundary between us and UA where they sort
of catchment scale and we farm scale,
and we, we trip over ourselves a little at the boundary.
But that social research in particular, taking away
that artificial divide, I think is one of the real strengths
of the new large bioeconomy.
That, that's an area that I'll be keeping my eye on
as I, as I depart.
Um, but I think some of the real gains are, are in sharing
of that kind of information.
Scott, your hand is still up.
Do you have a, a supplementary
Yes, I do, if I may.
Yep. Yep.
Um, so we've, we've seen the, the cut of the Mars
or the social sciences in the Marsden fund and, and,
but we all recognize,
and so Peter Blackman has been very adamant
that we can't do science without understanding
that human dimension, that that social, the social sciences.
How do you see that working?
Are you confident, I guess, are you confident that it will
remain a focus for, for ag research
as it merges into the new public research organization
that there is the resource to do this?
That is not, it's not necessarily,
the social science doesn't necessarily, um, always
obviously translate into economic productivity, but it,
but it, it can deliver wellbeing and,
and long-term positivity.
So do you see this as something that will be able
to be maintained, strengthened, um, built upon?
If I'll start, um, just by saying, um, that at our end,
um, without impact of our science,
there's not much point doing it.
So without impact and uptake.
So if you're doing science that delivers a, a widget or,
or map and zap or, or a drench or, but farmers won't use it,
or it's cumbersome or difficult or irritating or expensive,
or, you know, if there's impediments to uptake,
then there's no point us doing the science,
we're wasting our time, we're wasting your money.
So, um, so impact.
So, so carrying out research that goes from kind
of co-design with our farming groups right through
to ensuring uptake that social science in our space, uh,
it's, it's funded out of the core funding
to deliver the thing in the first place.
We make sure that the funding envelope, that the budget bid
includes co-design through to, through to uptake.
And so yes, I'm, I'm confident that for the bulk of
what we do, um,
that is definitely factored in when the
science is being planned.
Mm-hmm. Having Marie
And just, and I don't claim to be an expert,
but I'm really excited by the opportunities offered
by coming together with Manchi UA
and some of the, the loose understanding I have of some
of the work that the social science are doing in terms
of helping with future scenarios, um, working
with communities, you know,
so I think there's some really exciting stuff there that is
around both supporting economic growth goals,
but that broader societal impacts as well.
Um, new primary from, uh, Dr.
Thank you Madam Chair. And, um, this is, uh,
a similar along the lines, the one
that you actually asked earlier, Madam Chair,
but it's all about, um, it's more about royalties, um,
and where, um, royalties have been coming from particular,
what, um, would've been any particular gains
in, um, royalties from commercialization
and if there's any kind of future, um, expected increases
or expected, um, risks
with the current global situation that we have,
Talk about expected future,
and then perhaps Carol, I'll hand over.
There's a couple of things on the horizon for us.
Um, one is, um, a partnership with US Scion Plant
and food, uh, around a replacement for
p polystyrene beads and polystyrene.
Um, so, um, uh, that work is
with an entirely natural product
that is completely compostable and it is not oil based
and it doesn't co, it doesn't rake down into microplastics.
It actually is, is based on organic,
um, materials out of our sector.
Um, that potentially, um, has huge implications.
And that's just at the product launch.
Um, the one of its main benefits is being able
to use existing polystyrene compressing machines
to turn it into things like fish boxes, uh,
which are a massive problem in terms of the large plastic,
um, floating plastic
and non biodegradable stuff in the ocean.
So we have a few things like that, um, in the G space, uh,
inserting, um, oil
and fat based, um, production into, into, um,
crops like Sawyer and Wheat.
We have, we have a partnership within a company in
America doing some of that stuff.
And, um, I had hoped the royalties for that would start
to flow this year, uh,
probably next year and the year after.
We will definitely start to see some of that.
So, so there's more
of a future in this definitely than there is,
and for us, a history of it.
But Carol, I'll let you talk a bit about maybe AR 37
and some of the other royalty streams,
but we, we, yeah, we don't look like planting food do in
this space, that's for sure.
Yes. So just to give some context, the value
that we received from royalties last year was, um,
just over a million, $11 million
and the prior year was, um, at 11.8.
So it's a steady ish royalty stream for us,
and it's something that's a core part of our, um,
of our income, but it's, it's not at the same quantum
and level that plant food have.
Yeah.
Alright. Um, the question from Ruben Davidson.
Thank you Madam Chair. Um, page 91
of your report talks about genetic technologies.
And since that report, there's obviously been some, um,
quite rapid progress in proposed legislation
around Genetech.
Um, I guess two parts to this.
Um, the, the, the response we've seen in a different select
committee, but worth noting here, given the relevance has,
has been support for a very cautious approach overall.
So I guess from my question here for you is how has,
how has your engagement with the sector been around that
and what is the response
that you are seeing from the sector,
Marie?
Uh, yeah. So we have been working with, uh,
plant Food and Scion
and Agri Search is kind of the key
CROs operating in this space really to make sure that we
are able to strategically engage with our sectors, really
help provide information for them
and the ability for them to talk to our experts.
I think you will have seen with the Genetech bill,
obviously there was a range of responses from our sectors
where there's similarly, I think feeling cautious
around how to proceed.
Um, from an organizational perspective, we are supportive
of the Gene tech bill providing that kind
of legislative framework across
that hopefully will be future proofed.
'cause part of the challenge we have is
the has no act been very kind of defined
and technologies have been changing quite rapidly.
The real detail will come in those secondary regs.
And so some of
what we've been doing is our tech technical experts have
been feeding into the technical advisory group
that MBS been running in that space.
Um, and I guess what we are hoping for is that
we have some legislation that is future-proofed, is enabling
for us to be able to be able
to field tests some of the research that we
have created here in New Zealand.
And that's, that's done with a lot of safeguards around it,
but it enables us then to have something that industry
can decide whether
or not it's something that it wants to adopt.
So this,
because we've done a lot
of our field trials over either in the US
or in Australia, just
because of the challenge of going through the current
regulatory systems here
You have a supplementary Ruben,
your hand is still up all good.
Okay. So I'll ask Yeah, no, um, that's all right.
Um, if, um, do you have a supplementary, did you say that?
No, no. I've got a new primary, but I'll my head, so
before we go to that, I'll ask a quick
supplementary about this topic.
And so not able to do field trials here for the work
that is looking quite promising in our lab environment.
What does that mean overall in terms of cost
and um, other kind of, um, uh,
factors like delays, et cetera?
So it's, it's recognizing, so we, we could,
we could do a fair trial here under the has no act.
Um, the reality is it, it,
it has been quite daunting
and the sort of costs associated with the
application process and the engagement process
and everything has kind of, I think been offputting
for research organizations for some time.
So Scion did the last one about 10,
13 years ago, can't remember the details now.
Time is marching on.
So it's those, those tend
to be the costs, um, associated with it.
So what I meant was the cost of not able to do here,
but instead doing it overseas.
So here you obviously it's expensive, so you want
to go overseas because it's easier.
Yeah. But then there are other factors like the delays.
Um, so if you could elaborate on that.
So an example of a delay was if you like, we've, we've
ised, um, as a feed product,
our high metabolizable energy ryegrass on a small animal
trial here in New Zealand.
We had to grow all of that material in a glass house
and it meant that our feel, our animal trial had
to be quite small as a result.
So that's an example of the costs as opposed to
if you were able to grow more
of the material out in the field.
Um, and another example,
we have a gene edited endophyte, which is
just able to be growing in Australia.
So it is exempt from the Australian system.
And so we can just reveal trial it over there quickly, um,
and cost effective manner. Mm-hmm.
Thank you. A very quick question from Ruben Davidson.
Thank you Madam Chair. And this is really just a suck on
that Genetech question.
You've spoken about cost being a barrier for
us to do our own research here.
Do you think there's a risk if the legislation is too,
too loose and the cost is too low
that New Zealand could just become a desirable, desirable
sandbox for anybody to come and do research here?
I don't get a sense that
that's gonna be a scenario that plays out.
I think the, the framework that's currently in place
and then the secondary regs will be the key place where
New Zealand can put the appropriate safeguards around that.
Alright. So members, we'll have to finish there.
Thank you so much, uh, Sue to you and your team
and all the best, uh, for, um,
the steps ahead, uh, from tomorrow.
And, uh, we look forward to seeing you in, uh,
under another identity.
Um, next time. Thank you for your work that you are doing.
Thank you. Thank you. In public.
So just stay on the same link
and we will get land care in as soon as possible.
Good morning. We're just fixing our
camera and speakers. Yeah,
No problems.
Um, are we ready to get started?
Could we Just have one minute just to, um,
Yeah, yeah. Oh, yes,
sure.
Yeah.
Good morning. Good morning. Thank you so much.
Uh, so we have one hour with you
and, uh, we, um, uh, would like to ask questions, obviously.
And if you could start with some introductory remarks, uh,
introduce your team.
Introductory remarks can be around three
to four minutes, if that's okay with you. Thank you.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Good morning all.
I'm Colin Dawson, chair of ua.
Today is my last day in this role, given the merger,
the merged entity starts, uh, tomorrow, uh, joined by, uh,
James Stevenson Wallace, so chief executive
and Fiona to, uh,
help answer any detailed questions you may have.
Uh, and we have Lucy from Oh, yes. Hi, Lucy. Good morning.
Yeah, Lucy Bareth. Uh, on another link.
So if I may just, uh, say a few opening words, um,
a little bit similar to, uh,
the last Parliament Interest committee.
My, my opening comments in a way,
but, uh, the, the change, the challenges that we are facing
with the land, they haven't changed, of course.
And we have climate change,
extreme weather is an ongoing issue.
Land use pressures, um, biodiversity, uh,
decline, issues like that.
So, um, this is why with Monarchy Fen, we,
we have a very strong basic research, uh, role,
um, and, uh, a whole range of science disciplines.
Uh, and
although as an organization we are not directly aligned
to any one land use, uh, sub-sector, um,
such as horticulture or forestry or fisheries.
Our areas span all parts of our earthbound environment
and the society and economy intertwined with it.
Um, as you could expect at the moment,
we are really looking hard at our relevance, uh, knowing
that we are going into the new bio economy.
It was a good time for us to stop, take and, uh,
and really have a look at our strengths and, and weaknesses
and our relevance.
I think we've emerged from that process
of feeling our relevance is stronger than ever.
And I, I mean that genuinely, uh, the, um,
at the moment, for example, the primary sector,
they're really, um, they're really hitting sixes
with their export performance, uh, horticulture, um,
food and fiber, you know, not just dairy,
but meat meter as well.
And, um, that's terrific and that long may last.
But the, those sectors, they, they do rely on, uh,
a deep understanding of the land and caring for the land.
Um, bio control, uh, how we,
how we treat invasive species, whether it's weeds
or pathogens.
These things do happen.
We all remember the kiwi fruit situation with PSA.
Uh, it wasn't a fluke that it recovered rapidly.
It, it recovered rapidly
because planter food research had deep understanding,
deep research with kiwi fruit,
and they had c barss that were able to be substituted in
with the more vulnerable type
of kire vines that was susceptible.
So we were very lucky dodging a bullet there.
And the same, um, the same thought pattern.
We have to take that same thought pattern with the land.
We have to have capability 'cause things do happen.
And one of the reasons that things are likely
to happen in the future is climate change.
What happens is the climate alters
and then becomes conducive to new species, new pathogens,
new entries, whether it's, uh,
mosquitoes coming into Northland
because of a more of a tropical climate.
Um, it's same with plants, with, uh,
with fungi and other things.
So I won't go too deep into that,
but that's the principle behind needing
to maintain a strong foundation,
fundamental research capability
as we go into a bioeconomy, uh, PRO.
Um, we also feel
quite bullish about our reaching out to other land users
during the last year.
Uh, we are not focusing only on our important customers like
doc and district councils.
We are thinking very much about the private sector,
land users, how can we help 'em?
What are their problems getting alongside them
and forming stronger relationships with those people.
And, uh, it's, it's more important than ever for the reason
of demands with overseas export markets as well.
They want to know that our environment,
where our produce is coming from, uh,
cares about its environment, does care about biodiversity,
uh, and so on.
So it's not simply, um, it's not simply an accoutrement
that you add on.
It's a, it's a core, core demand for some overseas markets,
particularly in Europe.
Um, my other thoughts really are about what sort
of shape are we in as a performer going into the bioeconomy,
and that's looking very strong.
Um, in the last year, we uh,
brought in the most revenue per full-time equivalent
of any CRI, which was $229,000 per FTE.
Um, our revenue will contribute,
even though we're a relatively small CRI compared to others,
where our revenue will contribute 25%
of the incoming revenue into the new PRO.
Um, we have,
moving into the 25 26 financial year, uh,
Monki has over 600 revenue generating
research projects underway with a focus on government
and primary sector priorities.
So we've got quite a, um, quite a full dance card.
We're busy. Uh, it is always a challenge to, um,
deliver on those contracts with that demand
and that demand is, it's based on a real need.
Um, our, our, our government, uh, agency partners such
as DOC and the district councils, they,
they really understand how important, uh, decision making
around land uses, uh, the insurance sector.
We've been reaching out to, uh,
new customers like insurance sector and banks
because they want some actuarial understanding of risk.
And as we all know, it is the volatility
and the unpredictability of, of issues
with the weather on land that has us scratching our heads
and wondering, well, what do we approve?
What can't be approved? What's safe? What's not safe?
Is a hundred year solution really a
hundred year solution anymore?
And so on and so forth. So I really wanna put, um,
put a real, um, uh,
advocacy comment about that fundamental foundation research.
It, it's, it's not blue sky stuff for the sake
of blue sky science.
It's actually critical to a deep understanding
of the interrelationship of issues with the land.
And we, that keeps us in a much stronger position, able
to give advice that sound to private sector, um,
and our, our important export economy
and others as the questions come up.
So, um, yeah, I think that's all I wanted
to say is my opening, opening spiel.
Uh, so, uh, thank you for the opportunity
to, uh, meet with you today.
I'll, I'll hand over to, uh, to James.
Um, so thank you committee.
We're in your hands, uh, for questions.
Thank you, Colin. Thank you, James.
Uh, first we go to Ruben Davidson.
Thank you Madam Chair.
And, um, yeah, thank you Colin James, Fiona for, um,
being here on the eve of, um, the transition tomorrow.
Um, this is our, we, we just caught up prior to this
with, with, um, AG research,
and I made similar comments at the top of that, um, hearing
or review as well, just to say, you know, to wanted
to acknowledge the work that, that you do, um, at meaa or,
or, and that you have done.
And, um, also the recent visit that I was, um, lucky to have
to your site out there in Lincoln.
Um, one of the things that really struck me, both in
rereading your review in advance of this meeting,
but also in visiting your site, is that there's such a, um,
impressive and strong t Maori lens across all of the work
that Landcare does.
And, um, and it's excellent to see that,
that within the CRI model, I just wanted to know, as one
of the considerations of which there, I'm,
I'm sure there have been many in the transition into the
PRO, um, is that same focus
and, um, high caliber, um,
commitment to a al Maori view and values
and the work you do, is that gonna be maintained?
From my perspective? Absolutely.
Um, look at, um, the progress that UA has proud to, um,
achieve with our Martin partners.
Um, it's well and truly ingrained, uh,
in essential environmental research for New Zealand.
It's, um, not a nice to have or an annex.
It's well and truly embedded.
I think one of the strengths that MENA UA is bringing
to the bioeconomy PRO, um, is, um, that suite
of relationships and the way in which we've been able
to integrate, uh, western science
and indigenous views into core research.
Um, both for contribution to New Zealand,
but also, um, working with those iwi to accelerate, um,
the objectives that they're seeking.
So across our work on data sovereignty
or, um, bio cultural labels
or the work around, uh, wetlands, forestry health, um, it's,
uh, our commitment to TE Maori is embedded in that.
And we will continue that across.
Ruben, your hand is still up. Do you have a supplementary?
No, thank you, sir. Thank you for that answer though.
Great answer. Alright. Uh, going to Scott Willis.
Thank you. And, um, just, I, I really do appreciate your,
um, making it very clear that we are, we are, we're in a, a,
a strong position in terms of the primary sector.
Um, however, the other, the, the flip side of that is
that there is a certain cost in terms of, um, soil health,
in terms of waterway health, um, biodiversity and,
and and emissions.
And we've, we've been certainly hearing about the,
the need for a, a healthy, um, exposure
to nature for mental health.
But we are also hearing about the anxiety
that is coming from climate impacts, particularly
for people in our, in our rural sector.
So I'm wondering, are you looking at when we are,
when we are looking at what are the, what are the,
the benefits from the rural, rural development,
from monarchy F'S work, are we also counting the,
the costs of, of, um, the environmental
and social costs of, of increased productivity?
How are we, how are we able to, to,
to look at both sides of the coin?
I think when you look at the portfolio of work that, um,
we're proud to deliver, there's a key feature in there
around integrated, um, research offering.
A big component of that, um,
is leveraging our social research capability
that has been built up over time, uh,
and particular programs of work that would be relevant
to your, um, to your area is the moving the middle, uh,
endeavor initiative that will well
and truly, um, progressed.
Um, I might just hand quickly to Fiona just to talk to some
of the highlights of that work.
Uh, yeah. I, I think the thing
that strikes me from this program is the connection
with the primary sector
and the desire to, uh,
act as responsible stewards and to, to do the right thing.
So there's not only the trade signals,
which are very strong,
but, uh, the vast majority
of people in the rural sector want to leave something
that's improved to how they found it.
And so we've found a lot of desire
to do the right thing for climate change and biodiversity.
And so the, the path forward, forward is
what are the avenues that maintain productivity
and are good for biodiversity
and, um, lower greenhouse gas emissions.
Think across the programs,
you can look at particular examples of meno moving from,
say, catchment scale tools, right down
to practical applications that the rural community
can embrace and be empowered, empowered by.
So that comes through, if you think about regional
authorities, we do a lot of work around soil management
through smap, and we've made larger inroads,
particularly on this year in the 2324 financial year.
Um, but then you look at other more practical applications
where it gets to farm and,
and landscape scale, where we are working
with communities integrate, um, wood lots onto farms
to move towards more diversified landscapes where
bioeconomy, sorry, where the biodiversity,
the productivity returns
and then that spiritual connection with the land,
um, is all factored in.
Alright. Um, Scott, you have a supplementary on that.
Yes. So,
Yeah. Yes. Um,
so, um, I, we did ask,
or I did ask of ag research about the extension work
that they were doing and,
and they were talking about their excitement of joining
with, um, ua.
So I'm, I'm, I'd like to put that to you as well.
Where, how, how important is the, the, the extension to,
and, and what is, what shape does it take out into our
farming communities for this type of work?
Uh, well, MPI runs the extension service
through its network of farm advisors, but we
and ag research would put material to that,
um, function to help with that extension work there.
So they, they've got the connections along
with private consultancies,
but, uh, the partnership's really strong.
We've had lots of stands together
and, um, science for farming
because of really trying to make that partnership strong
with what we've discovering
that can be implemented at farm catchment scale.
Alright. A new primary from Dr
Thank you man and chair and thanks also, um,
to the group from Landcare.
It's, um, congratulations on the work
that you've done in the past.
Um, one of the things just reflecting on the past
that I was impressed with in the, um, annual report was, um,
some of the innovation stories and the story of, um, St.
John's Wart and the, um, the Beatle to control that.
What I liked about that was the, um, the use
of almost the counterfactual of what, what if
that had never been done?
And the story that was able
to be told from modeling out from that.
My question is, um, really how are you gonna use that kind
of, um, storytelling
and, um, that demonstration
of the benefit of the work?
Is that something that's going to continue as you move into,
um, the new PRO?
Because I think it's a really interesting approach.
I really like that, um, ability to, to reflect of
what if this hadn't been done?
And, and as a very second, um, very small follow up, um,
do we have any fears that St.
John's Wart Beetle is gonna attack something else?
'cause that seems to be what EV always happens to
our bio control stories. Thank you.
Um, thank you. And it is, um, a remarkable story
that Menen staff celebrate.
Um, not only the return on investment,
but the, the real world impact, um, that
that leadership has shown, um, in terms
of our progress over the last few years.
So if you like, take the last three years, um,
we've been working with our people to just, um, diversify
how we think about our work
and think about how we approach new potential partners
and how, um, you can table a compelling pitch
that might get them to invest, uh, in research with.
So things like that simple return of an on investment
that is breathtaking, uh, that actually bridges, um,
our environmental capability with productive, um, returns
as incredibly compelling.
So we've been working with our staff
to diversify our revenue streams
and that particular example is used quite often
as a demonstration of what we can contribute.
Um, I think the other big inroads for the organization, um,
over the last two years has been, um,
our Pacific partnerships, which again,
have a large component of introducing bio control, uh,
to target invasive, um, weeds.
And off the back of that, it's been basically an extension
of our capability here.
So our expansion into supporting Pacific, um,
has also helped us bolster our capability
that we're putting into the, um, the bio economy PRO.
So that work, um, is well and truly here to stay.
Um, it's a really strong component of our research offering.
And, um, on the technical aspect of, uh, potential risks,
um, I'll add to Fiona on that one.
So, um, so what they look for is,
as a potential control insect, they look for something
that has a very narrow range of things.
It eats, and then they put it in containment
and they feed it everything that it might come in contact
with in INO and New Zealand.
So they would go, will it eat this? Will it eat that?
And by the time, um, it's been cleared for release,
they are very confident it's not going to shift from this
to something that we don't want it to eat.
So what they do is once the population
of the target weed dies back, the
organism dies back as well.
'cause it's got nothing more to eat.
So it, it's a quite nicely, um,
self-managing issue. The question
Though, Vanessa, is um, is a really good one
and it, it illustrates why
that deep foundation science across more than just one
discipline, just not just the entomologist, but but others.
Because if you don't have a systems, a systems knowledge
and a systems into relationship knowledge,
you don't really know what unintended
consequences might happen.
So, um, yeah, that's a great, great question to open up.
Good. Um, new question from Ruben Davidson.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, we have a disproportionate number
of South Island mps on this committee, and, um,
and we are very proud of that.
And, um, and we also, um, looking at the
map in your report on page 10, um, the, the
landcare, um, team, uh,
the largest in Canterbury on the Lincoln camp
or the at the Lincoln site, you know, and,
and that meant more than a hundred scientists alone.
Um, one of the, one of the considerations
and concerns in the transition from Riss
to pros has been this Northwood drift, um, with
the potential for large, large portions of each
of the Riss or all of the Riss to move from south island
to the north island for a sort
of collective head office thing.
You able to give any, um, indication of where, where
that conversation is at internally for your team.
So that's been a, um,
conversation since I started some three years ago.
Um, as to, uh, where do you bolster your capability?
And for mea, our strategic base is
and always will be in Lincoln.
So there's a critical mass.
There are particular anchor scientists
who are highly competitive and attracting coworkers.
Uh, and that is about the, um,
the innovation hub that is Lincoln.
Uh, and likewise, um, there's very clear rationale for
what we have anchored, uh, in Auckland, uh, particularly
around our biological collections.
And then in Palmerston North
where we have distinct capabilities around the geospatial.
Um, I think the challenge that you could put
to the bioeconomy PRO coming together is
that we're making the most of, um, the co-location
of, of facilities.
So here in Lincoln, I look out over the plant
and food offices and down the road
to the ag research offices.
Um, and again, that whole focus on campuses
and how you present that to, um,
potentially international candidates wanting to come
to New Zealand and making sure we're living up to that.
So there is no, um, active downsizing of our offices.
That hasn't been a campaign.
Um, it's always been about having the, the, the right, uh,
researchers in the right place
and making sure that they, um, find the,
the work environments here condu conducive.
The other big factor in here is the, um, the different labs
that we're also bringing to the bioeconomy PRO.
And again, um, the highly specialized nature
of those labs drives the, the workforce
that's actually, um, attached to it.
So there's an infrastructure and human capability component.
Um, as you know, Reverend Christchurch is sort
of cool a moment too.
Yeah. And we benefit from that in terms
of attracting overseas talent.
There's a lot to attract people here with, um,
outdoor lifestyle as well.
So it's been a very strong draw card throughout our history.
Good. Um, Rubin, your hand is still up.
Is it a supplementary?
Sorry. No, it was technical deficiency on my part,
But, um, that's all good.
Uh, so we can go to Scott Willis for any question,
and then if you have any
more questions, I can come back to you.
Uh, thank you. And, um,
we heard from AG research their work internally
to reduce emissions and,
and I'm wondering what I'm, I'm, I'm still haven't got
through everything, so I'd like you to, um, you know,
let us know where you are going on that journey
as an organization and how that's gonna work
as you move into the new public research organization.
Where do you, where do you think your
responsibilities lie there internally to make sure that you,
you keep the emissions profile down?
Um, thank you for that question.
Um, so was very, um, proud of our subsidiary organization,
uh, to two and Biocare in terms of their, uh,
carbon leadership, both nationally, uh,
and globally for that matter.
Um, ua um, is also part of the, uh, um,
carbon, um, program.
So I understand in the 2324 year that we,
through off the back of capital investments,
we made 31% reductions, uh,
in organizational carbon emissions.
Now, um, the ability to make that sizable sort
of chunk was attached to some key, um,
capital projects going live.
So monarchy has a long-term commitment
to manage our carbon footprint.
Um, we are committed to the Toy two program.
Uh, but of course we also, um, celebrate our contribution
to carbon market operations through some of the research
that we deliver for, uh, ministry, for the environment, uh,
and then also in terms of, um, our research leadership
and better understanding New Zealand's, uh, carbon profile.
So investigation into soil, carbon, into peatlands,
all those sorts of initiatives is where we primarily drive,
um, our leadership on carbon.
But we're very sensitive to the fact that we
as an organization need to, um, be a leader in
that space in managing carbon.
Uh, yeah, if you do refer to our annual report,
you'll see on page 73 that we were 31%
below our target emissions for the year in question.
And we have been offset.
So we, uh, carbon neutral as certified by toy two
for the 14th year in a row.
So any of those emissions we can't reduce,
we have been offsetting.
So, you know, very, uh, proud of our history
with commitment to that.
Mm-hmm. Um, ary.
Yes. Um, thank you. And thank you for that.
And I, I noticed that you've got some great mapping, um,
particularly of wetlands.
So I'm wondering, not not simply internally,
but working on carbon sequestration,
what are, what are the programs that, uh, you see
as effective at, at enhancing
and restoring our, our wetland space, um, at, at now
that you've, you've, you've done the great work of,
of capturing where they are and, and what we could do.
So what we are looking at is whether peak lands can be
managed or not.
So, um, a as you are aware,
drained peak lands are a big source of emissions.
Uh, what we are looking at with, uh, university of
is is it simply a case of rewetting
or is that insufficient to reverse those emissions?
So, uh, new wetlands are fantastic for biodiversity.
Uh, you require a particular peak forming organism
to remake a peatland.
And so we are looking at, can, can you do that?
Can you introduce that organism?
Do you need to introduce other bacteria with it?
Uh, and will that then reverse that direction to
actually be met sequesters of carbon?
Uh, and then in addition,
we're maintaining quite an active program in, uh,
regenerating forests.
How much carbon, you know, are they,
and can that also be managed for more carbon uptake?
Um, we go to Ruben Davidson, your question.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, just, uh, similar topic, different approach,
I guess page 31, where you talk about some of that mapping
of the wetlands,
but you also talk about, um, some of the big data
and deep learning work that, that you've done.
Um, interested to get a sense from you around, um,
where the, where the current, I mean, it's probably a series
of questions to be fair around artificial intelligence
and how that's, um, deployed and managed
and, um, yeah, how, how, how it's,
how it's being used so far
and how that's being managed would be the first question.
So I think just at a, at a high level, um, we are, sorry.
We are absolutely pro, um, AI deployment.
And if you think about the majority of our re our research,
we refer to it as e research.
Um, I often tell people, if you take the lid off,
you'll see a massive modeling machine.
So deep data lakes, um, highly sophisticated algorithms,
highly sophisticated modeling.
So all of that lends itself
to potential benefits coming out from ai.
Um, what we've been doing internally is progressing a,
a digital, uh, transformation strategy.
So there's a component of the types of AI deployment
that would help us derive greater value from our, um,
large data assets right through to smaller,
uh, demonstration projects.
So we've got one at the moment where we're looking at the
deployment of AI to filter, um,
imagery from tracks.
So tracks, photos of predators,
rather than having staff go through that one.
We'll see over hours, um, having AI enable much, um,
more efficient and much more effective, um, processing
of those images.
I think, uh, as the sector comes together in different
shape, you're bringing together quite a substantive, um,
digital capability.
So again, um, I, I'm optimistic, um, in terms of
the capability that PFR AG research style
and ourselves, um, will have around the table.
And I think that that will, um,
create some new opportunities from Anup.
And just to sub off that with the chairs to permission.
Yeah. Yeah. So, so with that, with that shift from CRI
to PRO, um, and, and you've acknowledged it could bring,
and I guess the hope would be that it brings, um,
an expansion and,
and a collaborative approach
of expertise from each of the riss.
The counter to that could be that if you were simply
running a line by line assessment through a budget,
you could see duplication of roles and
or someone could see duplication of roles
and look to, um, make cuts.
Do you have, or have you had assurances given
the positive, um, uptake of and
and use of AI by, by your, you know,
by you, by land, by?
Um, do you, do you have assurances
or a sense of whether there's any chance
that could be slowed down or encumbered by the transition
or the, ultimately the formation of the pros tomorrow? So
Wet, um, explicitly sought those assurances,
but, um, if we take it from our company's, um,
learned experience, uh, accelerating performance
and AI requires ongoing investment.
Uh, and every time we go into an investment conversation
with the board, they expect us to come to the table with,
um, a perspective on the efficiency
before we ask for additional money.
So I think, um, going into a PRO environment,
that same investment discipline will play out.
We know that we need to account for every resource
and make sure that that's deployed
to its highest value contribution.
Um, accelerating work on AI
or accelerating, um, some of the tools
that we've been developing here do does
require ongoing investment.
So across the board,
the new PRO organization will have a number
of investment calls on its balance sheet.
Uh, it'll be open to the board
and the executive to work through those,
but, um, at this stage, we haven't asked for any assurances
and we haven't been given any explicit, um,
cost saving targets.
Uh, and, and if I can just say what AI is doing
is it's automating tasks,
it's not replacing people.
So in fact, we are requiring more, um,
specialized type of people that can manage the knowledge,
can ask the right questions.
And we are actually excited about when you take that,
we've got that environmental expertise.
When you combine that with orchard scale expertise,
we'll be able to ask questions
that haven't been answered before.
So, uh, what's going to happen is a nice sort
of step up in the synergy there when you've got the AI
experts from the different organizations together.
Yeah, fantastic. Just to further us up on that, if I may,
um, the, the workforce that come in with that
skill and knowledge in the AI space, is that
like where's, where are you seeing
that skill base coming from?
Is it, is it needing to come into the country?
Is it already here
or is it people transitioning within,
within the science community or within the science sector?
I mean, it is a mixture of all three.
I mean, the use of the large language model ai,
that's only one kind of it that,
that can be people transitioning from within the system.
The people are actually working on
advances in it have come from computer science background.
We, yeah, we have people coming out of the unis here,
people coming in from overseas or, or classes.
All those three options.
Do you see that with, with the,
what I think will be a huge increase in the,
in the applications and uses of ai?
Do you think that we've got a stable enough supply
of people able to do that work and
and to lead in that space?
Um, the indications
so far are very positive between homegrown talent
and people attracted to New Zealand from offshore.
You know, at, at the moment we are finding those people
because we can offer a compelling, uh,
vision for what they're going to work on with those skills.
That's the key to it.
I think the other point I would add to that is that, um,
place to a, a longer term strength of New Zealand's, um,
science regime, which is the international connection.
So I think the challenge
for the sector is keeping up our international profile,
continue our international relationship so that we're able
to access the AI developments, um, on preferential terms
that are developed overseas that we can deploy here so
that we don't fall behind those, um, technology curves.
So again, that's our, our researchers work like
that we have deep connections into to Europe.
Um, as part of that they'll be exploring AI
and modeling capabilities, uh,
and fostering those, those relationships further.
Alright, thank you Scott Willis.
Thank you. Um, and this is really just
to SAP on the earlier question
because it's great to hear the, um, the,
the potential from rewetting our, our wetlands, um,
or inoculating them as may be.
And I see that the, the workshop looks
as though it's had a wide stakeholder, um, participation in
for the, in the, in in Hamilton for the, the Waikato region.
So I really, the question is around, um, what's the,
what's the KPI that you've got here?
Are you, do you have sites that you are intending
to, to restore to, to rewet?
Is it, do you have a, a timeframe?
Is it, is it something that is, um, that,
that stakeholders are invested in a bit more detail?
If you've got any on, on where that might go?
I, I think it's earlier at stage than that.
And that we are trying to prove that it can be done and how,
and then you would be moving
beyond the very small case study sites to
where could this occur at wider scale
And, uh, so proving to be done.
So you're doing some, some, some work
to rewet smaller areas.
Uh, they're looking at the things that
will work in a re wetted context.
So that's, that's where they start.
And then they would go to the actual field site scale.
And I guess this is, this is something
that monarchy was doing, stakeholders are aware,
and you've got a, you've got a
timeframe that you're working to,
Uh, yeah, we can give you the specific details on this
because there's a number of programs, so I'm happy
to go away and put together the specific deliverables
and send them through, if that's alright.
That would be fantastic. Thank you.
That's good. Um, so any more questions members?
Uh, let's see.
Um, I don't see any hands up. Sorry, are you
Trying to my hand up and Yeah, it's,
so was next question.
Thank you. Um, so page 41 talks about, in,
in your report talks about a, a ang that was held, uh,
at kawi marai around pest control.
Um, sounded, sounded like an excellent, um, event,
shared understanding co-development, um, and,
and, you know, to, to achieve meaningful outcomes, wanting
to know whether, um, whether that is,
is a style of working that you will continue to roll out in,
in the PRO model.
Um, and if so, what the sort of future work plan for
that looks like, or whether there are any
cuts coming into that space.
This is certainly how we like to work.
We also think the most effective way to work.
Um, you, you come
with enduring solutions when you run workshops with, um,
people who are going to implement the results like
that community.
So we will certainly be promoting this as the way
to continue this kind of work.
And more specifically, are there any, do you have a sense
of, um, whether that's gonna be status quo, whether
that's gonna be more like that,
or whether you think that will be more challenging in the
PRO environment?
Um, I, I think it's fair to say
that we are understanding the capability
that our other three parties are coming to the table.
Um, it, it is, so our Maori research capability is something
that we have built over time
and we've been very deliberate, um, around how we've support
that capability being established.
So at this stage, um, I think it's a strength
that we are bringing to the table, but, um, I know
that we are looking at, um, how gel Maori
and different techniques of working with Iwi
and the different partnerships that bring brought together.
We just, um, the project very cautiously to make sure
that we protect our relationships
and make sure that there are bigger benefits
for those iwi communities as we go forward.
Mm-hmm.
I think, I think it's fair to assume
that there are many areas, uh, where
in the new PRO people will be looking
at different ways of working.
You know, it is almost like a, um, an internal, um,
best practice opportunity.
You know, what, what do you do in your organization?
What does your system look like? Which system do we adopt?
Can we implement that across the entire PRO?
Where do you need to have separate systems
for different work that specialized work?
So I think there'll be a lot of discussions about that kind
of thing, like way the ways of working, uh, topic.
Hmm. That's good. A quick supplement to that.
So how long do you think that process would take?
Well, it could be quite, quite a a period.
Some things will be quick decisions
and adoption of, uh,
certain methodologies and certain systems.
And so I, I imagine the systems would, uh, be first
and the, the more nuanced, um, uh, ways of, uh,
working in, in social engagement that would take some time
to promulgate and advocate internally.
So there'll be people who really believe in the,
the benefits of their way of working.
I think that will be talked about promulgated and advocated
and workshops will occur.
So that would, that would happen over
quite more extensive time.
Yeah. So why ask that next year when we, um,
have the PRO in front of us?
Obviously we would like
to hear more than just the restructure work.
Um, so I just wanted to get the assurance that, um,
that is going to happen in a very speedy manner so
that actually the actual work starts.
Yeah, understood.
Um, so I think a big thing from the FIN is we're bringing
over 600 projects that we will deliver.
We're very proud of the
service that we offer to New Zealand.
So, uh, we're absolutely committed to seeing that through.
And, um, the organizations are focused on a transition plan.
There will be timeframes
and milestones that we will diligently work through.
So I imagine this time next year we'll have a proud story
to come back to the committee on.
Great. And we go to Dr.
Sorry, I put a technical issues there.
Thank you very much. Um, looking through your annual reports
and the, um, the sec part two of the,
with the financial aspects of it, it's quite interested
to see that the, um, some of the heritage elements, um,
are listed but not particularly.
Um, the accounting of it seems a bit strange to me.
For example, the, um,
and I wondered if I could have just a bit more
explanation for it.
So the, for example, the Allen Herbarium, um,
which is a very significant, um, resource,
the value of that, um, you doesn't seem to be accounted for
and yet, um, I'm assuming there must be costs
that are associated with maintaining it.
So how do you balance out some of those historical
assets, which looking at the, the value of it must be
astronomical, but not actually listed as such.
And so, um, how does, how is
that managed from a financial kind of perspective
and wizardry kind of element there going on?
Or is, I mean, some
of these databases must literally be priceless.
How we managing that
Is that, um, the assets contained
in the Alan Herbarium would not be possible
to recollect.
So you've got specimens going back to the banks
and lander collections there.
And so if we were to lose them, we would not be able
to replace them.
And I think, uh, we've tried a number of times to account
for, well, if you send everybody out
and they did them again, you know, what,
what would that look like?
Well, some of them can't be recollected.
So, um, we've ended up accounting for it as a, as a building
with air-conditioning
and vault things, unfortunately, you're right,
it's a fraction of what it would actually cost to replace.
Mm-hmm. Yeah.
Uh, question, uh, from Scott Willis.
Thank you. And I, I note, um, on on page 55,
you talk about the, um, the, the, the demonstration
that you've been able to make that farmers are experiencing
climate worry, climate anxiety,
and have lower, um, wellbeing than others.
And I'm, I'm just wondering what, you know, we,
we have seen this week, this, well in the recent days,
the the Nelson Ma Marlborough region flooding events,
which have hit our, our primary sector particularly hard
as they are increasingly doing.
I'm wondering how does, how do you, how nimble are you able
to, to, to be, how, how does, how do,
how do you respond to events like this?
Or is it, is it more of a sort of a, a, um, a follow up and,
and research through time?
Because of course, you know, we are seeing a greater,
um, an increased frequency of more extreme events
and we seem at a, at an organizational level,
seem unable to move with the same flexibility to,
to, to help manage those extreme events.
So could you give some of your
insights into organizationally how you see this working,
What, what we've moved with at pace in the past?
So after, um, cyclone Gabriel, we completely
reoriented remote sensing programs
and said, we need to look at
in all the imagery we've got from that as to
where things have occurred, what's changed
with sedimentation.
And, and so we actually are able to change, especially
where something's on the, um, s funding,
the strategic science investment fund
or the core type funding that we can reorient, you know,
in a matter of a couple of days.
Uh, this organization has not traditionally been involved
with that immediate, uh, response phase
of natural disasters.
You know, we, we are in that kind of remote sensing
and research phase rather than that immediate response.
But we did spend, um, quite a bit
of time looking at what happened to natural
ecosystems in the aftermath of, of the cyclone.
And again, I can refer you to a really great kind
of little link overview of the top recommendations there
as to how to protect natural ecosystems in
advance of such events.
So, uh, yeah, again, another change in our research program
to look at what was considered most important at that time.
And, uh, if I just add, um, in our submission to, uh,
Mann's, um, strategic advisory group,
we did make some observations on, uh, funding policy
and how central government and CROs
or pros in the future respond.
How do they have a surge response?
How does that come together, um, efficiently, uh,
and how does, how do we then pick up on the
deferred work longer term?
So I know it's something that NB is contemplating.
Um, I have to say, we do as much as we can with our S fund.
Uh, this is a classic example where you do have flexibility
to move things around, um, and with the blessing of mb.
And then the other connector is, um, thinking about
how central government coordinates
what it needs from different research providers
under urgency.
And again, from a stewardship lens, uh, we're interested
to see where we go with that in the review findings.
If I could just follow up very briefly, I'm not,
I think you may have, you may have covered it,
but I think this is a really important, um, insight
that you've developed through, through the
creating the link, the negative relationship
between climate worry and wellbeing for the primary sector
and, and really does relate to all of your other work to,
to help reduce emissions on farm.
So I I I, I guess there does seem
to be a lot of evidence, a lot of justification,
and th this is something that
from my perspective, is really, really helpful.
We need to elevate it.
How do you see this happening through the new establishment
of the new public research organization?
Do you see signs where this is going
to receive a greater focus
because of course, it's, it doesn't lend itself to,
um, going for growth.
It is more of a, a public good aspect and,
and how, how does, how are we going to manage that,
that side of things?
I, I mean, I think they can work together
because having some
of these nature-based solutions actually increases the
resilience of the working lands.
So that's certainly what we are looking at in the new BSII,
I think the other thing you've picked up in our research
was the role of social capital.
So those social relationships, they helped
with food recovery, with physical recovery,
and then with just that sense of, um, wellbeing
and belonging and connection, all
of those were essential components
of coming back from disaster.
So the, the researchers found that as well.
And we're already reaching out
to our colleagues from those three other riss to kind
of talk about how you strengthen that together.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Right. Uh, Ruben Davidson,
Thank you. Um,
Madam Chair, the, um,
page 64 of your report has a breakdown of the, and,
and some analytics of, um,
how your team is comprised across ua.
Um, I guess there's a few questions here.
One is how you see that will change across the, or,
or whether you see that will change in the, um, transition
over the next, or how it's changed
and anticipated transition, and bless you
and how it changes, um, in the, um, immediate
impacts of being CRI to PRO.
And then I've got a couple of subs on that too.
Uh, so just Ruben in, in response to that.
Um, we do have a people
and culture work stream
that would be pulling together the new pros, um, you know,
engagement stat, the stats, the gender distribution, um,
we'll reset annual turnover baselines,
and we'll have a new picture on that age distribution.
So I don't, so immediately it becomes an aggregated position
rather than a change?
Yeah. Yeah. So, so then looking at, um,
pathways into the sector for younger people.
Um, and,
and we are hearing a bit
of chatter across the science sector across the community
that it's, it's becoming increasingly,
increasingly difficult to bring young people into the sector
and, and provide opportunities for them to, um,
work here in New Zealand.
Um, and, and the risk there is that we lose that workforce
and, and the greater risk is
that they don't come back if they go overseas.
Are, are you, do you have proactive programs within,
within monarchy ua, both to connect with secondary
or e even primary intermediate aged chil school children
and students to inspire them to
pursue careers in this sector?
And then do you have other programs
or internships, those sorts of things to bring students
through and to, um, I guess inspire them
to get involved in the work of Al Monki?
I'll, I'll get, um, Fiona to talk
to our relationships with the universities.
That's our primary mechanism.
So having, um, really clear discipline approaches working
with the universities and
joint graduate schools and those sorts of things.
I think beyond that, um, we don't see ourselves
as having a formal role within secondary schools,
but I do know that, um, a number of our, um,
scientists in their, their personal capacity do promote, uh,
career pathways
and talk about their experiences going into the
community in different forums.
Um, but they do that off their own,
back in their own standing, um, understanding we are aware
of, um, you know, STEM subjects and those sorts of things
and, and the changing profile
of which courses, um, schools are taking.
Uh, but as I said before, our primary target is, um,
our relationship with the universities.
Yeah. So we, we have a number of co supervisions
by our staff across all universities,
but we have focused areas of a joint graduate school
with the University of Auckland on, um,
biosecurity and biodiversity.
And, uh, here in Canterbury we have a joint
postgraduate school with ag research and plant
and food in both Lincoln
and the University of Canterbury on food transitions.
So it's a good working example of where we are saying, well,
there are social land-based biodiversity
and food production issues coming together there
and working with the next cohort
of researchers on those topics.
Excellent. Thank you. A
Supplementary from you
or is that a, it's a new, it's a new primary.
New primary, yep. Okay. We have done for that, um,
the fi right towards the end of the report.
Um, I was really pleased to see, um,
some reporting on the, um, science communication ultimately
that, that UA does, but at a very, um, public
and accessible level around some of the social media pages.
And, um, and I mean, I think, I think that's crucial
and important work and,
and you, you appear to be doing it really well.
I was interested to hear about, um, what the plans are to,
or whether there will be changes to those platforms
through the transition and what the plan is to migrate those
followers across, whether there's rebranding
of pages required
and whether there's, um, resource focused on doing that work
and, and growing those pages and their connection.
Uh, so there is an immediate response.
So from one July we moved
to almost like a federation type approach where each
of the four constituent, um,
organizations are maintaining those critical systems
of engaging with our current communities.
So that'll, uh, run through, at least until December, uh,
the organization's going through
and prioritizing what are the systems that need
to come together to better enable
how the future organization looks.
Uh, and I'm not sure at the stage
where the communications investment profile sits in that,
but it is, um, one of the focus areas obviously, um,
we do know with the PRO that we, uh, need
to continue making inroads on promoting our contribution,
promoting impact, um,
and also the role of communications and extension.
So there'll be a continuing focus, uh, the organization.
Mm-hmm. Thank you. So, all right.
Do we go to Scott Willis, uh, for a final question?
Thank you, honor, I note, um, your, your, um,
work on bio risk,
and of course we're, we're in a, in a period of, uh,
warming world with increased risk from invasive species
and, uh, plants, golden clam, et cetera.
Um, and I'm wondering where, how, how
this is shaping up as the new public research organization,
um, takes, takes shape, where this, where this work is going
and, and how big the, the team
and is for, for you at the moment, monarchy Fenway.
How, how important it has been looking, maintaining a, a,
a, an eye on the bio risk that we face in a warming world,
Um, of the, the, the streams that, um,
sit across the current organization's biosecurity, um,
is a natural collaboration area across ag research plan food
ourselves, uh, and with,
and we have, um, very well trodden ways of working
and, uh, jointly investing, uh, in biosecurity capabilities.
So again, moving to PRO environment, I expect that
to be a continuing focus.
And I think, um, you know, you have to look at the,
the numbers attached to the importance of biosecurity
for economy and also for environment.
Um, I, I think that'll be a, a,
a competitive strength for the organization.
And that will continue. Yeah.
Alright. So, so we will finish there.
Thank you to, uh, the landcare research team.
Thank you so much and all the bit, uh, for, uh,
big steps forward and transitioning into A PRO. Thank
You. Thank you, chair. Thank you C
Thank you. Thank
You. Bye-bye.
Members, we.